Add information about managing strings to documentation (#8638)
k9mail/k-9: docs/translations.md

# Managing strings

We use Android's [resource system](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/resources/localization) to localize
user-visible strings in our apps.

Our source language is English (American English to be more precise, but simply "English" (en) on Weblate).

Feature modules are expected to store strings exclusively used by them in their `res/values/strings.xml` file.
There's currently no final place for strings shared between feature modules. For now there's some in
[:legacy:ui:base](/legacy/ui/base/src/main/res/values/strings.xml).

Translations of source strings happen exclusively in our
[Weblate project](https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/tb-android/). This means the source language is only modified by
changes to this repository, i.e. via pull requests. Translations are only updated on Weblate and then merged into this
repository by the Thunderbird team. This is to avoid overlapping changes in both repositories that will lead to merge
conflicts.

## Adding a string

Add a new string to the appropriate `res/values/strings.xml` file. Be careful when using Android Studio's translations

> editor. It might modify files containing translations. If so, revert those changes before committing the changes.

Reviewer: This I think we can expand on. Some could consider US English also a "file containing translation". I think you are trying to say that the string should be added to the en-US variant only, and that Android Studio sometimes adds placeholders for all locales if you click the wrong button?

Author: To be honest, I don't really know if Android Studio's translations editor is a problem in this case. I rarely use it. I've only seen pull requests from external contributors modify files containing translations. Maybe this should be rewritten to mentioned that nothing but the source language should be changed.

## Changing a string

Changing a string should be avoided. Weblate doesn't automatically invalidate translations when a source string is

> changed. This can be worked around by removing the old string and adding a new one. Make sure to only modify the source

Reviewer: I saw weblate has a plugin to mark source strings as changed, is that something that was considered? Might make changing strings easier, but generally I agree if the meaning is changed then we should have a new key.

I'd suggest slightly more positive wording, i.e. avoiding "workaround" but focusing more on what is the way that developers can make clear to localizers that a string has changed in meaning.

Author: I haven't seen those add-ons before. They might be new. 

I saw the user "None" added them to our list of repository-wide installed add-ons a week ago. So maybe that's when they were added to Weblate.

From the documentation it doesn't appear like they do what we want, which is mark all translations of a string as "needs editing" when the string in the source language was changed. 
Instead, the add-on `Flag new source strings as “Needs editing”` marks a source string as "needs editing" on Weblate when it was changed in the repository. Since we don't allow editing source strings on Weblate, there's no point in us using this add-on.
The add-on `Flag new translations as “Needs editing”` will do the same for translated strings. However, we try to avoid changing translations in our repository. And in the rare cases when we do, we don't want them to be marked as "needs editing" on Weblate. So we probably don't want to use this one either.

language. It's fine for the translations to then contain unused strings. The next merge with Weblate will remove those.

## Removing a string

Remove the source string from `res/values/strings.xml`. Don't modify translations under `res/values-<lang>/strings.xml`.
The next merge from Weblate will automatically get rid of the translated strings.

## Changing translations in this repository

> This should be avoided whenever possible! It's also something that should only be done by team members that have the
> necessary permission to lock translations on Weblate.
> 
> So if you absolutely have to change translated strings in this repository, follow this procedure:

Reviewer: Slightly more positive framing:
```suggestion
This should be avoided whenever possible, as it can create merge conflicts between Weblate and this repository. If you need to change individual strings, please translate them on Weblate instead. 

If a mechanical change is necessary across all languages that doesn't require langauge translation, this should be discussed with the core team who will use this procedure:
```

> 1. Lock translations on Weblate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Lock translations in the [repository maintenance](https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/tb-android/#repository) settings in Weblate.
```

2. Commit all outstanding changes on Weblate.

> 3. Merge the changes from Weblate into this repository.

Reviewer: Can you associate this with the buttons on Weblate? I think this means pressing the "Commit" button, and then the "Push" button plus merging?

4. Base your pull request branch on the merged repository state.
5. Open a pull request that changes files containing translated strings.
6. Follow the pull request review process.

> 7. Merge the pull request.

Reviewer: Is this the same pull request?

Author: Yes. 

Any suggestion on how to reduce ambiguity?

> 8. Make sure Weblate has caught up with the changes to this repository.

Reviewer: Can this be sped up using the "Update" button in Weblate?

Author: No. The process is automatically kicked off by webhook triggered by GitHub every time our repository is updated. It's Weblate's import process that takes a while. But usually less than a minute.

# Managing strings

We use Android's [resource system](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/resources/localization) to localize
user-visible strings in our apps.

Our source language is English (American English to be more precise, but simply "English" (en) on Weblate).

> Feature modules are expected to store strings exclusively used by them in their `res/values/strings.xml` file.

Reviewer 2: I think this lacks guidance for shared strings, and it’s worth questioning whether shared strings are a good idea at all. 

I see that shared strings promise to be easier maintainable (one update applies in all places), reduce duplication and smaller file sizes. However, they come with significant challenges:
- Strings are often context-dependent, and using them across multiple contexts can lead to awkward or incorrect messaging. 
- A shared module introduces dependencies between modules, complicating the build process and reducing modularity.
- Developers may overuse shared strings to save effort, even when it’s not appropriate.
- Shared strings can confuse translators if the intended use or context is not well-documented, increasing the risk of mistranslations.
- Modifying shared strings can have unintended consequences, as the change might not align with all the contexts in which it is used. This cascades down to translations.
- Introducing shared strings can lead to prolonged debates among team members about whether a string qualifies as "shared." Introducing shared strings can lead to prolonged debates among team members about whether a string qualifies as "shared."

We should find a clear definition for shared strings. From my point they should be limited to truly universalI strings, such as `Save`, `Cancel` or branding-related messages. Additionally:
- They should provide context to document the intended use of each shared string, helping developers and translators to understand its purpose.
- We should provide a long term solution instead of advertising the old legacy module. A better approach could be to create a dedicated shared resource module.
- Create shared string collections for specific domains (e.g., "Mail", "Authentication") rather than a single global resource.
- Define clear ownership of shared strings. Who decides what gets added to the shared resource? 
- Review shared strings on regular basis to check their relevance and if they are appropriately used.

This should help to minimize subjective discussions and keep the workflow efficient. However, it's essential to carefully evaluate whether the benfits of shared strings outweight these challenges in the first place.

There's currently no final place for strings shared between feature modules. For now there's some in

> [:legacy:ui:base](/legacy/ui/base/src/main/res/values/strings.xml).

Reviewer 2: I think this lacks guidance for shared strings, and it’s worth questioning whether shared strings are a good idea at all. 

I see that shared strings promise to be easier maintainable (one update applies in all places), reduce duplication and smaller file sizes. However, they come with significant challenges:
- Strings are often context-dependent, and using them across multiple contexts can lead to awkward or incorrect messaging. 
- A shared module introduces dependencies between modules, complicating the build process and reducing modularity.
- Developers may overuse shared strings to save effort, even when it’s not appropriate.
- Shared strings can confuse translators if the intended use or context is not well-documented, increasing the risk of mistranslations.
- Modifying shared strings can have unintended consequences, as the change might not align with all the contexts in which it is used. This cascades down to translations.
- Introducing shared strings can lead to prolonged debates among team members about whether a string qualifies as "shared."

We should find a clear definition for shared strings. From my point they should be limited to truly universaI strings, such as `Save`, `Cancel` or branding-related messages. Additionally:
- They should provide context to document the intended use of each shared string, helping developers and translators to understand its purpose.
- We should provide a long term solution instead of advertising the old legacy module. A better approach could be to create a dedicated shared resource module.
- Create shared string collections for specific domains (e.g., "Mail", "Authentication") rather than a single global resource.
- Define clear ownership of shared strings. Who decides what gets added to the shared resource? 
- Review shared strings on regular basis to check their relevance and if they are appropriately used.

This should help to minimize subjective discussions and keep the workflow efficient. However, it's essential to carefully evaluate whether the benfits of shared strings outweight these challenges in the first place.

Author: I agree with most of this. Except for:

> - Define clear ownership of shared strings. Who decides what gets added to the shared resource?
> - Review shared strings on regular basis to check their relevance and if they are appropriately used.

This feels very heavy-handed and a more rigorous process than we apply to our code.

I think it's best to have that discussion in a separate pull request. I'm happy to remove the last sentence about shared strings or the whole paragraph for now, so that we can get the rest of the document merged.

Reviewer 2: Then let's remove the sentence.
